# Pipelines of genome-wide monomer identification
The scripts used for identifying monomers in the genome are included in this
directory.

# Dependencies
Here is a list of required tools for this pipeline:

* [TandemRepeatsFinder](https://tandem.bu.edu/trf/trf.html)
* [MUSCLE](https://www.drive5.com/muscle/)
* [HMMER](http://hmmer.org/)
* [bedtools](https://bedtools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

# Scripts in this directory
## config.sh
The file for setting up paths of dependencies. Please change according to
your environment before running other pipeline scripts.

## model_construct.sh
The script for constructing profile-HMM based on a set of L1Md promoters.

## iteration_rphmm.sh
The script for training model parameters using sequences identified as
monomers.

# Instructions
1. Make sure all the above dependencies have been installed.

2. Change the variables in `config.sh accordingly to your environment.
Note that some variables correspond to *executable programs themselves*,
but others correspond to *directories* which includes multiple programs.

3. Run `model_construct.sh` to get an initial profile-HMM. It takes 3
parameters:
  * The result of `nhmmer` scan, which includes individual monomers.
  * The length of extension for each individual promoter. Recommended
    value is 500.
  * The file which includes chromosome sizes. It can be obtained via
    `fetchChromSizes`. You can find this program in the UCSC kent tools:
    http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/admin/exe/

This script will estimate the optimal model length using information
obtained from the detected monomers. The output files include a profile-HMM
file with `.params` extension, a `consensus.fa` file with the consensus
sequence of the model, and a FASTA file with the sequences of individual
extended promoters, named as `[monomer_name].ext[extension_length].fa`.

4. Run `iteration_rphmm.sh` to train model parameters through an iterative
process. This scripts takes 3 parameters:
  * The `consensus.fa` generated by `model_construct.sh`.
  * The `nhmmer` scan output which is also the input of `model_construct.sh`.
  * The FASTA file of extended promoter sequences generated before.

This script will train the emission probabilities of the initial profile-HMM.
It will generate a number of intermediate files. When the training process
terminates, a finalized profile-HMM file with name
`[monomer_name].ext[extension_length].final.params` will be generated. This
file includes parameters of the finalized model.
